David, have you got rich?
I've got a couple of others, but I think they're out of print now.
Okay, he's got the tape back on. I only have just a few more minutes of material if you don't mind.
All right.
The series that you have been working on now, it looks to me from the dates for about 25 years, the Vyajins Interplanetarius?
Vyajins.
You better say it.
That's how you say it in Portuguese. Vyajins Interplanetarius.
Okay.
But I'm not about to try to give you a lesson in Portuguese. I've been struggling with that damn language myself for a couple of years and not getting very far.
One of my first questions on that was that when you started, I guess the start of that was some short stories that were published in the Continent Makers back in the early 50s, I think.
And the first novel was Queen of Zamba.
The first story of that series, I believe, was the Queen of Zamba, which is published in paperback by Davis now.
Okay, at any rate, that goes back quite a ways.
Then I wrote several short stories also in that setting.
When you started it back then, did you intend for that to be a future history?
Not really, no. I just sort of started it.
Well, let's say that this way, when I was a pimpled adolescent or a high school student, I loved Edgar Rice Borrows's tales of Mars and Venus and devoured them as they came out.
Many years later, when one of my boys got to the age where it was right to read aloud to him, I started reading a princess of Mars.
And every so often I'd say to myself, Geefers, this is lousy writing. I could do much better than that.
Well, I thought, wouldn't it be fun to do John Carter over in modern dress, you might say?
In other words, write a story which, from its basic assumptions, requires a good deal of sword play and things of that sort, a lighthearted adventure on an exotic planet, but be strictly logical about it.
In other words, in Borrows's Mars, they have radium rifles that can shoot 50 miles by radar sight, and still they fool around with swords and spears, which no real people would do.
So, on my planet, they also have swords and spears, and they would like to get guns, but they're not allowed to.
And the various reasons are all duly set forth, and of course they try to get around the prohibition and sometimes succeed.
So I went ahead and wrote the story on that general assumption.
And likewise, I don't have earthmen interbreeding with Christians because their chromosomes wouldn't match.
In fact, that's what the plot of the Hostages Deer turns on, that the local dictator gets his hands on.
This guided tour guide, Dufourcus Reed, and marries him off to his sister at the sword's point, because he knows that then the sister will never bear an heir, you see, who might threaten his power.
Okay, have any of your readers or publishers ever inquired as to if you have an overall plan or a direction for this, like a timeline or anything like that for that series?
Well, as the stories have been written, I've kept a rough chronology as to who was where and hence and when.
And so I try to keep it consistent.
Well, by the way, I never finished telling you, you asked about what sort of person I found Robert Howard to be in my investigation.
Well, everybody knows that Conan is an idealization of Howard.
In other words, the kind of person that Howard thought he would have liked to have been, the ruthless, domineering, footloose, irresponsible adventurer.
Actually, Robert, and with no respect for laws and regulations, actually Robert was just the opposite type, except for hot tempers and chivalrous attitude toward women, they had nothing in common.
Robert Howard was shy, bookish, compassionate, extremely polite, and socially timid, and he's so law abiding that he wouldn't cut across the neighbor's lot even, although everybody else across the lane did.
He was just about as different from the character Conan in the stories as a person could be.
But he still was an idealization, or Conan may have been.
Yes, yes, kind of.
Well, Robert was always talking a lot about how he wished that he thought he'd have been rarely in his element if he'd been born on the Texan frontier in the 19th century,
or in some barbarian society like the ancient Gauls or Goths or somebody.
Well, I think he'd have had a very unpleasant surprise, because it wasn't his temperament at all.
He was a shy bookish introvert.
Do you think he would have gotten married had he lived, or would he have been a bachelor forever?
Would he have gotten married if what?
If he had lived long.
If he had lived.
That is impossible to say.
He had an outsized monkey on his back, and he was doomed from some way back.
He'd planned his suicide ever since he was a little boy.
Mmm.
Yeah.
He told his mother when he was a little kitty that, mama, when you die, I want to die with you.
And the foolish woman, I think, probably sort of giggled and encouraged him.
Oh, I hadn't realized that. I thought it was a sprue of the moment thing.
No, no, no, no. It was long planned, and several people knew about it, but they didn't do anything.
The only thing you could have done with Robert was if you'd gotten him to a good shrink early enough, quite a good many years before he actually killed himself, why something might have been done, but that of course is uncertain.
Mmm-hmm.
Can't even tell.
Excuse me.
Okay, I just had one more question on that series, just to finish that off.
My impression of that series was that that's probably your closest body of work to pure science fiction, in that you know, well, when they travel on spaceships, for instance, you observe the laws of relativity.
I just, I think most of the planets and the stars involved are fairly near ones and so forth.
I wouldn't be wrong in calling that science fiction then, as opposed to science fiction.
Well, no science fiction. There are no supernatural elements in it.
Right. Okay.
All right, just to change it entirely here to sort of wind down, your writing goes back, I guess to what, 38, 37?
Yes.
Which predates even people like Azimov or Heinlein or Van Boat and so forth.
I think I started just about the same time, but he's passed 200 books and I've only had 93 out, so I'm afraid I shall never catch up.
I wouldn't be surprised if you were in second place.
Oh no, there are several people ahead of me like Delray and Silverberg.
Silverberg has more books than you?
Yes, I think he has well over 100.
Hmm, I'm done.
A lot of them are juvenile, so you don't hear about them much.
Well, I was going to ask what it was like to write or to help form, in fact, to form the so-called golden age of science fiction back in the late 30s and through the 40s and so forth.
Well, the problem with golden ages is that you never realized you had one until it's over.
Right.
Although there was just a bunch of young folks trying to make a living.
Okay, so you know, would you have no sense of a fellowship or a special era?
Yes, there was a great deal of camaraderie.
There was a group of about a dozen of the writers and editors who used to get together in New York about once a month,
including John Campbell, Jack Williamson, Henry Kutner, Edmund Hamilton, and Otis Klein.
Let me see.
Oh, I can crank along and I just say I could think of the names of a few others.
And we'd get together and have an evening and talk and talk and talk and end up with usually ice cream and cake.
We were comparatively sober a lot.
In other words, there was no sense that you, as the kinds of writing you were doing, the editors you were working with and so forth,
that you were sort of restructuring or re-pointing the direction of science fiction, anything special in that area?
Oh, I don't know.
I daresay that various ones of us did have their greens and fancies at times and wondered how it was all going to come out
and would this become, would the genre expand and take over the mainstream and various things of that sort?
But as to that mostly, as I said, it was simply a matter of making a living.
How much influence would you say that Campbell had on you?
On me, very great.
I learned a great deal of what I think I know about storytelling from him.
The three main influences on me were Campbell and Pratt and the 1941 session at the Brad Lofreider's conference.
Yes, I did read that.
Well, in relation to Campbell for just a moment, was the influence to such an extent that he would send a story back to you and say,
rewrite it or do this to it?
Yes, yes, you could do that.
But one thing that did not occur between us was his proposing story ideas and having me write them
because I've never been very good at turning other people's ideas into effective stories.
So he may have tried it a few times, but when nothing came of it, why, he, I guess he quit.
I can't think of one story that he proposed and I wrote the story, but then he rejected it.
I finally sold it to one of his competitors.
That was the Ghosts of Melvin Pie.
He suggested a ghost story in which the dead man had had a split personality, so he had two ghosts.
Yes, I read that one. I remember that story.
You mentioned the Brad Lofreider's conference.
What was special about that? Who were the people involved there?
At that time, they had a lot of very good people there who really gave you the lowdown on the notes and bolts of writing
and on the commercial and legal aspect.
Not only Fletcher Pratt, but also Bernard Devoto and William Sloan and several others of that caliber.
Going back to something you said right at the beginning of the interview, you were not really raised as a science fiction fan.
You weren't one of the regular readers of the Pulps and so forth, were you?
I was an intermittent reader, let's say.
I'd been reading it often on ever since Boyhood, but I was never a really heavy, faithful reader in the sense of buying every issue of every magazine.
One thing that's always fascinating to me about science fiction, the reason I mentioned the fans, is the interaction between fans and authors.
Have you had much of a, you know, I don't mean fan mail so much, but have you been influenced?
Have fans asked for things that you've tried to give them? What kind of relationship do you have with your readers?
Well, for the most part, it's been very pleasant, except for some of the more enthusiastic admirers of H.B. Lovecraft,
who have talked over the jolly idea of hitting me in the face with a cherry pie at the first fantasy convention in Providence,
but the volunteer pie thrower got cold feet, fortunately, so we didn't have that problem.
But you've never...
I've been very pleasant, and I do try to answer all the letters I get, except, of course,
for those that are either abusive or by persons of unsound mind or that don't include a return address,
and that happens too sometimes.
And I don't write long letters in reply. Usually it's postcard, but I don't want to fall into H.B. Lovecraft's trap.
He thought he had to write a long, erudite answer in long hand to every letter that he got, and he had to do it within 48 hours.
Result was, his correspondence build up and up, but he was spending most of his waking hours just writing letters.
That's one of the reasons he was so poor all his life.
Has anybody made an effort to collect all those letters and put them together in a volume?
Oh, yes, they've been published in five volumes by Arkham House.
Okay.
They are now. They are available. I think maybe the first two or three are out of print, I'm not sure.
But you can always write Salk City in the ask.
And those are, of course, only a selection because he is believed to have written something like 100,000 letters in the course of his life.
And several thousand of those still survive and are available, either at Brown University or in the archives of Arkham House in Salk City.
I read over 2000 of the things in doing my biography of Lovecraft, and his scribbly long hand got more and more illegible as he got older.
Okay, I just have a couple more.
From your vantage point, having written science fiction, science fantasy for such a long period of time,
as you look around now at the field and compare it to what it was, say, back in the 30s,
what impresses you most? Is it changed that much and what would the changes be?
Qualitatively, I shouldn't say that it has changed very much.
It is a much bigger field, of course, and the number of authors is very much larger.
Although the number of magazines is still about what it was in, let us say, the middle 1930s, only about five or six at any one time.
There had been a couple of booms when the word got around among the publishers that there's gold in them, our hails,
and everybody jumped in and pretty soon there would be 20 or 30 magazines.
But the market was never big enough to support that.
However, while the readership has expanded greatly, most of it, you see, takes the form of reading paperback novels
and paperback collections or short stories, not magazines.
That's been the big change since the Second World War.
You know, there were no such things as American paperbacks between the two world wars.
Sort of a follow-up to that.
We've spoken with some authors, particularly Norman Spinrad, that seem to feel science fiction,
the separation of science fiction and fantasy, say, from so-called mainstream literature, is artificial.
It's done by the publishing industry that it really should be part of the mainstream.
Have you any thoughts on that?
Do you think it deserves a special category or that it should become part of our normal literary currents?
Well, you have to remember that at one time, imaginative fiction, that is science fiction and fantasy, was the mainstream.
Prior to, I think it was about the year 1719, when Defoe published Robinson Crusoe,
there was, practically speaking, no such thing as realistic fiction.
We wanted to scatter the exceptions, but like the first one was Don Quixote,
but by and large, practically all fiction had elements that we should recognize today as science fiction or fantasy,
that is to say ghosts and miracles and marvelous gadgets of one kind or another.
Why the Odyssey is a science fiction and fantasy saga right there,
with the witch, Cersei turning people into pigs and the monsters, Cilla and Correptus, eating ships and so on.
In other words...
Then in the 18th century, realistic fiction came in, you see, and became popular,
and it's grown and grown until it came to be called in the 20th century the mainstream fiction.
But imaginative fiction has kept right, perking along alongside it, and it's still there.
Okay.
As for the classifications, remember that things in the real world exist by themselves,
but the classifications of them are human inventions.
They are artifacts which men make for their own convenience.
And some of them make better sense than others, or are more useful than others,
but they're not part of the laws of nature.
Okay.
This may be not a question that you would care to answer, but it's one that I cannot help asking an author.
Do you have any works as you look back that you're particularly proud of, or that you're particular favorites?
You know, that kind of question.
Well, there are several, but it depends upon a proud of in what way, or remember fondly in what way.
I think probably my work that has accomplished the most was the ancient engineers.
And as for what stories I remember with the greatest pleasure, well, it is a general rule.
I like best the story I just finished, whatever that is, but of course not everybody agrees with that.
For example, this darkness fall has become what they call a classic, that it's been out of, in and out of print steadily now for 40 years,
and I believe it's currently available in paperback.
So I must have done something right, but on the other hand, when I read it nowadays, I'm aware of many places.
There are many things in it that I do differently today.
Poor sentence structure and things of that sort.
Okay.
You mentioned this just a moment ago, but let me just ask you for my last question one more time.
Could you sort of summarize what you're working on now, and what maybe plans you have for books that would be coming up soon?
The Howard Biography, which is in collaboration with my wife.
We had a third collaborator, Dr. Jane Griffin, who was a native of Eastern Texas who knew the Howard Ayers,
and was familiar with that territory.
She was a psychologist and was very much interested in the psychological aspects of Robert Howard's life,
but she died last year ago.
And so, Katherine and I have been working on the book by ourselves since then, and this is my own autobiography.
There is the movie novelization, but whether that will come to pass or not, nobody knows,
because you have to please several different people with quite different ideas as to what they want.
And that's about it for what we are presently working on.
I have another book of light verse called Heroes and Hub Goblins.
I am just sending off the corrected page proofs on that.
And I have one science fiction novel and one fantasy novel planned,
and I believe that the agent has gotten me a contract for the fantasy novel,
so as soon as I get the other things out of the way, I shall have to work on that.
All right, I really can't, I mean I could think of some more things to ask,
but probably that's going to be enough. We've taken enough of your time.
I'm going to give you back to David in just a second.
He's going to give you the details of how we're going to get this taped to you.